[AUDIO LOGO]
>> Myths and mysteries shroud
crystals with elusive power
and purpose, tales of
wish-fulfilling jewels,
elixirs of life, and advanced
technology of ancient
civilizations.
What was behind the
obsession with crystals
like the philosopher's
stone and the Chintamani?
Were they actual
gems, or were they
metaphors for an internal
type of treasure?
Why has it been said that
ancient civilizations
like Atlantis and
Lemuria ran on crystals?
Let's follow the
trail of these myths
to discover the origins
of crystal power.
>> Native Americans have a
special relationship with
crystals.
It's important to know that
our oral history here in North
America goes back 127,000 years.
We are one of the oldest
cultures on Earth.
In Native belief, everything
that is created in the world
comes from a crystal.
A Cherokee foundation
myth, the one
that described what
creates the universe,
places at the very
center of the created
worlds an enormous crystal.
From every corner
of this crystal
are seven strands reaching
out into seven other strands
that each reach out into
seven other strands,
and thus continuing
into infinity.
What the crystal matrix is doing
is it's holding information.
The whole universe is
based on information.
What you dream about for your
life is often what manifests.
With your thoughts and dreams,
you have given information
to the world.
That information creates
favorable circumstances
to manifest what you
want in your life.
Thus the crystals are
dreaming the world
as they communicate the
information coming from the one
source.
That one source, you can
call it the one light, God,
great spirit, the
primordial intelligence,
but what this intelligence
needs to create the world
is a transmitter,
and the transmitter
at the center of the universe
is this primordial crystal.
Thus all things
come from crystals.
>> The Atlanteans were said
to have crystal technology.
They used these giant
crystals as power supplies,
as generators.
And there is one
warning that comes
with the legends of
Atlantis, because they
use crystals for everything.
So they really learned how
to harness these crystals.
But because of the greed,
they pushed it too far,
and the crystals
actually destabilized
the Earth's magnetic
grid, which then
led to the Earth changes that
sunk the continent of Atlantis.
And some say that
the strange anomalies
that happen around the
Bermuda Triangle, where
the magnetics go all
awry, and ships disappear
and so forth, is a remnant
of the ancient Atlantean
technology of crystals
that went awry.
>> The main stone Edgar
Cayce mentioned in relation
to Atlantis he called Tuaoi.
It was a white ray
opalescent six-faceted stone,
which guided the
activities generated
from the temple in
the Atlantis era.
It is said that this
temple was in the Atla,
in the central
circle of Atlantis.
The light of this stone appeared
as the means of communication
between infinity and the finite,
like the heaven and the Earth,
or whereby they
received communications
with outside
forces, which sounds
to me like extraterrestrials.
The Tuaoi stone acted as
the central power station,
radiating energies and
guiding transportation systems
of levitation, which
would travel through air,
on water, or under the
water just the same.
It is said that
before Atlantis sank,
sages and initiates of
the Atlantean mystery
realized the fate
of the civilization
and departed to other
lands, carrying with them
the secret doctrines.
>> Throughout history, there
has been this obsession with
magical stones.
You can find it in
Eastern legends as well as
Western legends.
So for example,
alchemy, they talk
about the philosopher's stone.
And the philosopher's stone was
said to be able to transform--
instantly transform
lead into gold.
It represents the
perfection of the great work
of the process of transformation
and transmutation.
And they thought that
anyone who possessed
this philosopher's stone
would be able to heal
all ailments, any sickness.
They would have eternal life.
They would be able to become
immortalized and perfected
like a god.
So the philosopher's
stone was highly
sought after because
people wanted eternal life.
People wanted health.
People wanted riches.
And it was almost like
that Midas touch--
whatever that philosopher's
stone touched,
it would instantly
transform it and perfect it.
So there's very many
legends like this.
The philosopher's
stone is one example.
>> Other myths and legends talk
about the Lemurians who escaped
into the Inner Earth to
restart their civilizations.
The mythical city of Shambhala
and the Crystal City of Tomasis
are both said to exist in giant
caverns within Mother Earth.
It is said there are hidden
entrances, for example
under the Bucegi
mountain in Romania,
and portals to access the
advanced transportation
levitation vehicles, which
travel through tunnels
and atmosphere generated
by crystal technology
and advanced knowledge.
The Lemurian crystals were
said to be programmed, hidden,
and rematerialized
into the Earth
to resurface for
the right people who
could attune to the sacred
knowledge stored within them.
Another reading by
Edgar Cayce revealed
that portions of the
Temple of Atlantis
may still be discovered off
the coast of Bimini island
in the Caribbean Sea.
In 1970, near the Bimini
island, Dr. Ray Brown,
a physician and adventurer,
was on an expedition
searching for sunken
Spanish galleon treasures.
After a storm and big
hurricane, he was scuba diving,
and he stumbled upon
ruins and columns,
and saw the top of a pyramid
protruding out of the sand.
Inside the pyramid,
he discovered a room
which held a crystal sphere.
The sphere in the
center of the room
was cradled in two metal hands
on top of a pedestal column.
And from the
ceiling, a golden rod
tipped with a red crystal
pointed at the crystal ball.
Surrounding the
crystal in a circle
were seven chairs with one
being higher than the rest.
And on the wall was a falcon
holding the sun in its talon
with seven beings sitting
on top of each wing.
And on its breast were 14
gemstones in a two, three,
four, three, two pattern.
The one object Dr.
Brown could retrieve
was the crystal sphere,
and demonstrates
powerful mysterious properties.
When a metal rod is placed
into the field of the crystal,
at a certain angle, the rod
would begin to float above it.
>> Many crystals actually
have myths behind them.
There's legends of
where they came from.
And so for example,
diamonds, where
do the diamonds come from?
Well, the diamonds in
an ancient Greek legend
were said to have come from the
God Kronos, the primordial god
of time, who changed a young
man who was named Adamas,
and he transformed him into a
very immensely strong stone.
Now, the name Adamas
actually means invincible.
So it was thought
that this stone that
comes from Adamas,
the diamond, brought
the power of invincibility
and almost like immortality.
And so it was seen
potentially as an antidote
even for poisons,
because it would
make the person who
consumed it invincible
or who wore the talisman of it.
But it was also then
where our whole tradition
of getting the wedding
ring of a diamond
came from was all the way back
to this ancient Greek legend
where it said that the
diamond had the power
to reinforce the bond of
love between two people,
so that it was invincible
and indestructible.
>> The name of amethyst is
derived from a Greek word
meaning sober.
There is a mist that
in ancient times,
people would drink wine from
goblets made of amethyst to be
able to drink as
much as they wanted
without becoming intoxicated.
In Chinese medicine,
amethyst is used
to clear heat in the blood.
When we drink too much,
one of the results
is heat in the blood.
And indeed, Chinese medicine
does note the use of amethyst
for acute alcohol poisoning.
So maybe they didn't
have amethyst goblets
in ancient Greece,
but who's to say
they didn't put
little amethyst points
into their goblets,
whatever they were made of?
Why name the stone "sober"
in the first place?
>> Emeralds also have a really
interesting myth or legend
behind them, which relates to
the Emerald Tablets of alchemy.
It is said that Thoth, the
Egyptian God of Wisdom,
was able to alchemically melt
emerald into this liquid form,
and then the Emerald Tablets,
the formula that he then
transcribed contained
all the secrets on how
to perform all the
magical transformations
and transmutations of
the alchemical tradition
were then inscribed
into this emerald.
But rather than
them being etched in
as if you were scratching
it into an emerald stone,
they were actually protruding
from the Emerald Tablet, which
meant that the emerald had to
have been melted into a mold,
and then the mold was removed
after the emerald solidified.
And I just love the legend
that is behind the labradorite.
Now, this one comes to us
from the Native Canadian Inuit
tribe.
And it said that there
was an Inuit warrior who
was walking along, and
he found that there
was light that was trapped
deep within the Earth
within some stones.
And to try and free this
light, he took his spear,
and he pierced into the
Earth to pierce the stone,
and he was able to
free most of the light.
And as that light
escaped, it formed
what we now know of as
the beautiful Aurora
borealis, the Northern Lights.
But some of that light remained
trapped within the stone.
And those fragments
of light that
remain trapped within the
stone then formed the stone
that we now call
labradorite, which
is why the labradorite
has so much
of this rainbow color in
it, and looks very much
like the Northern Lights.
There's one myth about
the Icelandic sunstone.
It's in the Icelandic
sagas, and it
mentions that the Vikings
used this sunstone
to help them navigate
the seas and locate
where the sun was at even
on completely cloudy days.
Now, since then we've
found enough information
from their mythology pointing
to a large, clear, calcite stone
crystal that they were
able to hold up to the sky.
And because it
polarized the light,
they were able to locate exactly
where the sun was coming from,
even if it was
behind the clouds.
So there's an example
of one of these myths
that has been verified.
>> Deeply interwoven with the
origin myths of crystals are
the mystical properties
that come with them.
Crystals have a long
history of being
used to foretell the
future to contact the dead
and to develop
psychic abilities.
Ancient tales point at
the multidimensionality
of crystals, where they can
dematerialize and rematerialize
at will, and be used to
enter into altered states
of consciousness and
connect to higher beings.
So what is the spiritual
function of crystals?
Why are they here,
and how can they
be used to strengthen the
connection between our physical
and spiritual world?
>> Nature spirits,
also called devas,
are the etheric counterparts or
spirit essence of each living
being.
There is a general deva
of the mineral kingdom,
but there are also specific
devas for, say, rose quartz
or larimar.
There are many distinct families
of nature spirits coexisting
in our reality in the
ether, like living
in parallel universes where
humans may not necessarily
perceive them, for they exist
at different frequencies.
However, it is possible
under proper conditions
and with sensitivity
to communicate
with the elemental
kingdom, especially when
one is ready to invite them
in by communicating with them
or making offerings.
>> Crystals are multidimensional
and can shift into different
dimensions.
I've heard of
inexperienced crystals
dematerializing and
then coming back.
They don't do that
frequently, but they
can do it under the influence of
higher beings to help train us.
>> Crystals have been used for
divination since ancient times.
For example, scrying,
crystal balls,
we've all heard of the
psychics using crystal balls
to foresee the future.
There is actually
something to this,
but crystals for readings for
example and for divination
get twin crystals.
What a twin crystal
is is two crystals
that are almost identical, and
they come from the same source.
They actually grow off of the
same little seed, for example.
And just like twins,
they have this sort
of connection
between them, almost
like a psychic
connection between them.
They're entangled in some way.
Energetically, they
resonate with each other.
So you could hold one
crystal, one of the twins,
and then you can give the other
crystal to a person that is
having a reading done for them.
And this will help you.
Then through the crystal, it'll
communicate to the crystal
that you're holding.
They're holding one;
you're holding the other,
and it'll help transmit some
information in a more amplified
signal to help you tune in
to what it is that needs
to be read for this person.
So this is one way that
divination can happen.
>> On the subject
of crystal balls,
Western culture often thinks
Native Americans had no
technology.
This is false, the difference
being that our technologies
were spiritual technologies.
Some people called
skywalkers could really fly.
Others could teleport.
We could build
pyramids and skulls out
of hard crystal stones.
We could also make
crystal balls.
It's important that people know
how to work with the crystal
balls because if you gaze
too long into a crystal ball,
you can really harm
your optic nerve.
Crystal balls really need more
purification than other stones.
You will need to
purify them often
because you don't want them
to hold any information.
They have to be
completely neutral.
And then you want to find
a place where there's
a light reflecting into it.
And then you gaze at
that specific place,
and you diffuse your vision.
And with time, you'll see mist.
And in that mist,
something will happen.
Or maybe you'll
see it in the ball.
Everybody is different
at that level.
But in the beginning,
you gaze five minutes.
That's it.
Then after a while, you can go
10 minutes, then 20 minutes.
You want to stop at 20
minutes because you can really
harm your optic nerve.
>> Crystals have historically
been used to develop psychic
abilities.
For example, through
black obsidian mirrors,
although technically
obsidian is not
a crystal but a glass, which has
been used since ancient times
by the Mayan
peoples, and I'm sure
other ancient Earth-based
cultures to access one's
shadow self, their feminine
or masculine sides,
or other parallel
past life selves,
as they practiced
scrying and journeying
into the black obsidian
mirror by candlelight.
We can also use
double-terminated crystals
with a partner, each holding
a double-terminated crystal
to practice telepathy
and sending and receiving
information.
>> Another important stone for
your personal development are
Herkimer diamond
crystals for dream work.
Actually, they come from
the region of Herkimer
in New York State, and
they're not diamonds;
they're clear quartz crystals
with the particularity
that they have bi-termination.
You see they have two points.
You travel through that.
It's like a vortex
through which you
travel to be able to do
out-of-body experiences.
So what you happen
to experience when
you start working with a
proper prepared Herkimer
is that it will accompany
you in the dream world.
It will travel with you;
it will protect you.
It's clear light.
Quartz crystals are clear
light, and so they protect you
from anything that's dark.
>> Crystals can be such
important allies for us
as humans because they have so
many gifts and so much support
that they can bring
into our lives,
whether it's for healing,
for helping us raise
our consciousness, for becoming
more in tune with the kingdom
of nature, and the mineral
kingdom, and Mother Earth.
Or whether it's for opening
up our psychic abilities
and dreaming, creating
more sacred space,
anchoring sacred geometry,
all of these things,
there's so many amazing
things that crystals
can bring into our lives.
So make them your
ally, get to know them,
build relationship
with them, and let
them go to work for you.
>> It's important to understand
the spiritual function
and purpose of the
mineral kingdom.
That is to hold
important information
and transmit
important information.
The crystals were placed
here at the beginning
of the creation of
the planet to transmit
the fundamental primordial
laws of the universe
and to hold them there.
And that's why they are
so important, because they
can hold them for millennia
upon millennia upon millennia,
and they hold the basic, pure
information of the universe.
As we purify
ourselves and we work
on our spiritual
mission in life,
we become more and more evolved.
And if we do that, we become
more and more beautiful
in everything we do.
And that's what we
call the beauty way.
And the crystals, they
are reminding us of that,
because they are beauty.
They have beautiful form,
and they're all different.
Crystals are there
to show us, look,
if you evolve, you
become beautiful.
And so we learn to
walk on the beauty way,
and the crystals are there
to remind us of this.
And so as such, they
are precious friends.
>> From foundation myths and
cosmic origins to ancient
crystal technology gone awry,
and mythical subterranean
kingdoms to magical gems,
crystals seem to be a common
and primordial motif in many
legends from across the world.
The esoteric power
embedded in crystals
has been utilized for eons
by shamans and initiates
across the globe to bridge the
physical and spiritual worlds.
As these precious stones
fall back into our hands, may
they inspire us to bring forth
the light, the brilliance,
and lucidity within
ourselves as we refine
our own crystalline natures.
May we treasure their gifts
and make them our allies
in our conscious
evolution so we can
co-create a more beautiful,
harmonious, and luminous world.
[UPBEAT MUSIC]